.TH INCUSBOX-TALOS 1 "2026" "incusbox 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
incusbox-talos \- manage Talos Linux VMs in Incus
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B incusbox talos
.IR SUBCOMMAND " [" OPTIONS "] [" ARGS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Provides lifecycle management for Talos Linux virtual machines running under Incus.
Talos is a minimal, immutable Linux distribution designed for Kubernetes nodes.
.PP
Images can be sourced from the
.B windsor
simplestreams remote
.RI ( images.windsorcli.dev )
or built locally from official Talos GitHub releases.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B remote add
Add the windsor simplestreams remote to Incus.
.TP
.B remote remove
Remove the windsor remote.
.TP
.B remote list
List all configured Incus remotes.
.TP
.BI fetch " [VERSION]"
Download the Talos metal disk image for
.I VERSION
from GitHub, decompress it, convert to qcow2, and create the Incus metadata bundle.
Requires
.BR curl ,
.BR zstd ,
and
.BR qemu-img .
.TP
.BI import " [VERSION]"
Import a previously fetched Talos image into the Incus image store.
.TP
.BI launch " NAME"
Launch a Talos VM named
.IR NAME .
Uses the windsor remote if configured; falls back to a locally imported image.
.TP
.B list
List running Talos VMs.
.TP
.B versions
List Talos image versions available on the windsor remote.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-version " VERSION"
Talos release tag (e.g.\&
.IR v1.9.5 ).
Default:
.BR v1.9.5 .
.TP
.BI \-\-arch " ARCH"
CPU architecture:
.B amd64
or
.BR arm64 .
Default:
.BR amd64 .
.TP
.BI \-\-cpus " N"
Number of vCPUs for the launched VM. Default:
.BR 2 .
.TP
.BI \-\-memory " MiB"
Memory limit for the launched VM (e.g.\&
.IR 2048MiB ).
Default:
.BR 2048MiB .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_TALOS_VERSION
Default Talos version. Overrides the compiled-in default.
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_TALOS_ARCH
Default architecture.
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_TALOS_REMOTE
Incus remote name for the simplestreams server. Default:
.BR windsor .
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_TALOS_REMOTE_URL
URL of the simplestreams server. Default:
.IR https://images.windsorcli.dev .
.TP
.B INCUSBOX_TALOS_BUILD_DIR
Directory for downloaded and converted images. Default:
.IR ~/.local/share/incusbox/talos-builds .
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Add the windsor remote and launch a Talos VM:
.RS
.nf
incusbox talos remote add
incusbox talos launch my-node
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build and import a specific version locally:
.RS
.nf
incusbox talos fetch v1.9.5
incusbox talos import v1.9.5
incusbox talos launch my-node --version v1.9.5
.fi
.RE
.PP
Launch with custom resources:
.RS
.nf
incusbox talos launch control-plane-1 --cpus 4 --memory 4096MiB
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR incusbox (1),
.BR incusbox-create (1)
.PP
Talos documentation: https://www.talos.dev/
.br
talos-incus project: https://github.com/windsorcli/talos-incus
